Add Iroha 2023 Q3 Report (#145)
hyperledger/toc: project-reports/2023/2023-Q3-Hyperledger-Iroha.md

---
layout: default
title: 2023 Q3 Hyperledger Iroha
parent: 2023
grand_parent: Project Updates
has_children: false
has_toc: false
---

# Project Health

> Currently, active maintenance of Iroha 1 has stopped and there are no plans for major releases.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Currently, active maintenance of Iroha 1 has stopped, and there are no plans for major releases.
```

The release `2.0.0-pre-rc.18` is officially merged and stable as of July 31th.

All Iroha 2 developers are now fully onboarded and at maximum productivity.

The integration of Ursa essential parts to the Iroha codebase continues.

# Questions/Issues for the TSC

> - No indexing on [2023](https://wiki.hyperledger.org/display/TSC/2023+Project+Updates) page

Reviewer 2: Could you please add more details to the question `No indexing`?

Author: Done, thanks!

> - No automatic copies for Iroha on [2023](https://wiki.hyperledger.org/display/TSC/2023+Project+Updates) page, need help with fixing it

Reviewer 3: There are no plans to copy project updates back to the Wiki. The ones that are there are ones that were submitted prior to the change to submit project updates on GitHub. All future project updates should be looked for on the [Hyperledger TOC site](https://toc.hyperledger.org).

Author: Understood! Thanks for explaining that.

> - LFX interface [caused problems](https://community.lfx.dev/t/lfx-mentorship-platform-issues/2130) for candidate vetting/selection, and internship allocations

Reviewer 2: Thank you for reporting this to the LFX team. @minyu66 is there a way to track these requests?

Author: Hopefully, we'll be able to address it soon in the upcoming TOC meetings.

# Releases

Past quarter releases:
* v2.0.0-pre-rc.15
* v2.0.0-pre-rc.16
* v2.0.0-pre-rc.17
* v2.0.0-pre-rc.18

> Iroha 1 is in maintenance mode, no releases are planned until the completion of the internship project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Iroha 1 is in maintenance mode. No releases are planned until the completion of the internship project.
```

# Overall Activity in the Past Quarter

> According to the [Iroha Activity Dashboard](https://insights.lfx.linuxfoundation.org/projects/hyperledger%2Firoha/dashboard;subTab=technical?time=%7B%22from%22:%222023-04-01T06:38:18.000Z%22,%22type%22:%22absolute%22,%22to%22:%222023-07-31T21:00:00.000Z%22%7D) for the third quarter of 2023 (April-June), the Iroha repo has 228 PRs submitted by 44 contributors.

Reviewer 2: This is great. There is increase in contributors count, though most of them are reported as individuals interested in the project.

Author: Thanks for pointing that out; I'll DM you to discuss the details because I need clarification about the LFX interface.

## Iroha v1

> The project is in maintenance mode. It has a minor brekage for outdated platforms the fix is to update the build system to `ninja` from `CMake`, but it is held off so as not to interfere with the internship project and the restoration of the CI for the last releases of the v1 branch is planned to happen in Q4 2023 or Q1 2024.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The project is in maintenance mode. It has a minor breakage for outdated platforms. The fix is to update the build system to `ninja` from `CMake`, but it is held off so as not to interfere with the internship project and the restoration of the CI for the last releases of the v1 branch is planned to happen in Q4 2023 or Q1 2024.
```

> The project is in maintenance mode. It has a minor breakage for outdated platforms. The fix is to update the build system to `ninja` from `CMake`, but it is held off so as not to interfere with the internship project and the restoration of the CI for the last releases of the v1 branch is planned to happen in Q4 2023 or Q1 2024.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The project is in maintenance mode. It has a minor breakage for outdated platforms. The fix is to update the build system to `ninja` from `CMake`, but it is held off so as not to interfere with the internship project and the restoration of the CI for the last releases of the v1 branch, which is planned to happen in Q4 2023 or Q1 2024.
```

### Mentorship program

- Iroha 1: [extend queries with optional arguments](https://wiki.hyperledger.org/display/INTERN/Iroha+1%3A+extend+queries+with+optional+arguments) — [Tomasz Grun](https://github.com/dominious1)

# Iroha v2

## Overall comments

> The team was focused on providing a stable base for internal projects, the main focus was on improving the UI/UX, optimisations and stability improvements. In addition to that, the mentorships are progressing well.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The team has been focused on providing a stable base for internal projects, mainly on improving the UI/UX, optimisations and stability improvements. In addition to that, the mentorships are progressing well.
```

> The team has been focused on providing a stable base for internal projects, mainly on improving the UI/UX, optimisations and stability improvements. In addition to that, the mentorships are progressing well.

Reviewer 4: The term "internal project" is vague here, could use a clarification on whether this means "internal to the company" or "internal to the foundation". thanks!

Author: We've been testing Iroha actively on the projects internal to the company: that provides us with enough control to plan for the future demo.

> The main focus of the maintainers was on establishing reliable integration tests via `pytest` and `allure` to supplement the bare-bones Rust testing infrastructure.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The maintainers' main focus was establishing reliable integration tests via `pytest` and `allure` to supplement the bare-bones Rust testing infrastructure.
```

> Major developments have been made in the supporting SDKs, as well as supporting tools: namely, 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Major developments have been made in the supporting SDKs, as well as supporting tools; namely, 
```

The SDK compatibility has been raised as a prime concern. As such we are designing a comprehensive SDK compatibility system, with test coverage and a feature matrix. Anticipating the move to dynamic linkage, we also prepare coherence tests, which should identify double coverage of the same feature set, and supplements to support `async` co-operative non-blocking concurrency through the FFI boundary.

The work on the FFI for WASM smartcontracts is temporarily halted, as [Marin Veršić](https://github.com/mversic) had been promoted to technical lead on a parallel project, involved greatly with the `iroha-java` SDK.

## Upcoming activities: 

- ISA restructuring 
- Account restructuring
- Private and Public blockchain executors

## Maintainer Diversity

Currently, the Iroha 2 core development team consists of:

* 8 Rust developers + 1 PM + 1 tech lead
* 1 front-end developer
* 2 full-time QA engineers

> * 2 full-time technical writer

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* 2 full-time technical writers
```

* 1 part-time DevOps
* 1 community manager who also handles front-end, back-end, DevOps and writing tasks as needed

> The maintenance team now consists of the Soramitsu employees. [Gregorz Bazior](https://github.com/baziorek) (Yonix Digital Systems, AGH University of Science and Technology) is interested in Iroha 2 and maintains Iroha 1.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The maintenance team is currently comprised of SORAMITSU employees. [Gregorz Bazior](https://github.com/baziorek) (Yonix Digital Systems, AGH University of Science and Technology) is interested in Iroha 2 and maintains Iroha 1.
```

- Use of `nightly-2023-06-25` toolchain
- Initial [`nix` packaging as flake](https://github.com/hyperledger/iroha/pull/3426)
- WasmTime optimisations [via caching of build artifacts](https://github.com/hyperledger/iroha/pull/3661)
- Improved platform support for Mac M1 and [linux-x86-{musl,glibc}](https://github.com/hyperledger/iroha/pull/3711)
- 12 minor Bug fixes
- [Incorrect topology rejected early](https://github.com/hyperledger/iroha/pull/3667)
- [`kagami` subcommand to generate local `docker-compose`](https://github.com/hyperledger/iroha/pull/3585) files
- [Fix for communication deadlock](https://github.com/hyperledger/iroha/pull/3394)
- Mentorship program
  - [FFI client library bindings](https://wiki.hyperledger.org/display/INTERN/Project+Plan+-+Iroha+2%3A+FFI+client+library+bindings) — [Orange Ng](https://github.com/orangeng)
  - [DSL](https://wiki.hyperledger.org/display/INTERN/Iroha+2%3A+DSL) — [Yasser Arguelles Snape](https://github.com/RealNeGate)
  - [Blockchain explorer update](https://wiki.hyperledger.org/display/INTERN/Iroha+2%3A+blockchain+explorer+update) — [Kshitij Roodkee](https://github.com/horizenight)

# Prior reports

> * [2023, Quarter 1](https://github.com/hyperledger/toc/pull/65)
> * [2023, Quarter 2](https://github.com/hyperledger/toc/pull/108)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* [2023, Quarter 1](https://toc.hyperledger.org/project-reports/2023/2023-Q1-Hyperledger-Iroha.html)
* [2023, Quarter 2](https://toc.hyperledger.org/project-reports/2023/2023-Q2-Hyperledger-Iroha.html)
```
